This is Drake’s dad pictured on the cover of his 2017 album More Life.
This is French comedian Jacques Bodoin in 1969.
This is country star Larry Gatlin in 1979 and soul artist Al Green in 1972.
This is the British synthpop band, Heaven 17, in 1981.
These artists work span decades, genres, and continents, but their album art had one thing in common.
They were all sitting in the same exact chair.
And it wasn’t just them, this chair popped up on album covers everywhere.
Now, you could easily chalk this up to being one of many weird album cover trends over the years.
But in the 1970s, when these album covers were pretty much unavoidable, they were actually following a photography trope that was 100 years in the making.
Let’s start with this photograph of Charles Darwin, the famed naturalist, relaxing in his old age at his English home in 1880.
On this wicker chair.
At the turn of the 20th century, wicker furniture was all the rage.
Its success was driven by the fact that breezy open air spaces, like verandas and porches, were in high demand.
This was long before homes were air conditioned, and when the summer came around, no one in their right mind - and with a decent amount of money - wanted to overheat.
This June 1914 guide on “How to have a cool house” suggests replacing walls with curtains, building sleeping porches, and filling the entire living space with wicker furniture.
In short, “bring summer into the house.” Outside of the home, wicker was used in resort hotels.
At the beach and on ocean liners and passenger planes.
And it wasn’t just furniture, there were wicker baby carriages and wheelchairs and this….thing.
but perhaps its most lasting function well, besides baskets was its use in portrait photography.
Wicker was light and easy to move around, and it was breathable, great for when hot lights warmed the studio.
More importantly it could be woven into countless eye-catching decorative forms.
Many of these designs - particularly this ornate asymmetrical one - were actually called photographer’s chairs, or posing chairs.
From the late 1800s well into the 20th century, no portrait was complete without a trusty wicker chair.
Now these were everyday people - a young woman a mother and child A handy man and shoe polisher.
But just as often you’d see portraits of powerful, influential people photographed in wicker chairs - often in seemingly candid positions.
Mark Twain William K. Vanderbilt Countless presidents...
Hanging out on their porches The wicker chair, it seemed, was the superficial equalizer.
It dressed up your average citizen and made powerful figures seem approachable.
And the styles changed along with trends.
While many were designed in the US and Europe, a few incredibly popular models came from Asia.
Those pieces were recognizable by their hour-glass shaped bottom.
And if you opened a magazine or newspaper by 1920, one particular style captured people’s attention - the peacock chair.
Its hour-glass shape morphed into a large throne like back.
It was often described as “picturesque” “elegant” and “majestic” By the 1920s, the peacock chair took center stage in ads for summer home furniture, And when the burgeoning film industry was producing it’s first crop of movie stars, it was a natural fit for portrait photography.
But let’s backtrack for a second to one of the earliest photographs of the chair I could find - it’s not of a movie star.
It’s a portrait of a mother with her child, published around 1914.
It’s titled “Jailbird in a peacock chair.” This woman was a prisoner - serving life for killing her husband.
And it was likely taken at Bilibid Prison in the Philippines.
At the time the photo was taken, the Philippines were under US rule, and American tourists were visiting the islands by the boatloads.
Bilibid Prison was an unlikely attraction - not only did it serve as a jail — it was also a manufacturing facility.
Equipped with its own sales department for shoppers to pursue.
This 1913 write up from an American tourist describes the place and mentions the infamous chair: “We are familiar with the queer shaped chair made of rattan called by some “Peacock chair”... it is made at Bilibid Prison.” And a 1916 Vogue article about “Shopping in the Far East” says a stop at the prison is a must.
This nameless prisoner likely took part in making those chairs.
She wasn’t famous or a powerful figure — but sitting in the chair transformed her into something regal.
By the 1960s dozens of iconic figures had posed with that same chair.
Poets, writers, presidents, Famed actresses.
The chair appeared in television and film Like in My Fair Lady, which was set during the turn of the 20th century.
Cecil Beaton, the set designer for the film, was obsessed with wicker furniture.
This picture of Marilyn Monroe?
He took it.
In the 1960s, album cover designers picked up on the trend.
And over the next two decades, portraits of artists in the peacock chair peristed.
These covers can be broken up into a few categories.
One I like to call the casual leg.
There’s the close up.
And the group shot.
For this one, the person is just randomly in an open field.
And finally, there’s this one.
Best represented by Funkadelic’s 1979 album “Uncle Jam Wants You” which references two specific things.
The “Uncle Sam Wants” you Army recruitment poster And this photo of Black Panther Party co-founder and leader, Huey Newton sitting in the peacock chair.
In 1967 when that photo was taken - it immediately became a visual representation of the Black Power movement.
And the chair took on a whole new meaning.
It showed up at Black Panther meetings and rallies, even when Newton couldn’t.
It took up residence, in all it’s glory at the center of the stage.
While most album covers with the peacock chair drew their inspiration from the casual glamour of mid-century celebrity portraits Some artists saw it as an assertion of their cultural power — even today that’s one of this chair’s most lasting legacies.
The peacock chair album cover petered out in the 1980s and was replaced by more minimalist and intimate portraits of people.
But it remains one of the most referenced chairs in photography - perhaps because it makes everyone sitting in it look really cool.