For centuries, these two islands in the South Pacific were home to Māori people.
They call it Aotearoa.
the indigenous Māori population was rooted in a sacred relationship with the land and surrounding waters.
They organized society and an intricate system of tribes...
and subtribes.
They flourished.
But by the end of the 1800s roughly 60% of them were dead.
Due to new diseases, displacement, and war all caused by Western colonizers who called the islands:
New Zealand.
Over the course of several decades more than 90% of collectively owned Māori land had been taken by the British Crown.
They not only took the land, but they took a river.
That river meant...
everything to us.
There were hundreds of my ancestors that were taken.
We lost language.
We lost land.
We lost our way of life.
You kind of wonder at times...
Who am I?
What am I?
But today...
something groundbreaking is happening here.
A kind of reparations, or, as they refer to them in Aotearoa:
settlements.
Land and cash settlements for Māori accompanied by historic formal apologies from the government.
"Another first: this law includes an apology." Our iwi received $87 million in cash from the crown.
17 land blocks are being returned with deeds and titles.
$170 million...
peanuts.
It really is peanuts.
I'm here in Aotearoa to take a closer look at Māori people's long fight for sovereignty over their lands.
And all the mixed emotions and outcomes that come with it.
I'm also here to explore how a similar movement for redress could gain more steam in the United States for Native Americans and Black people descended from those enslaved in America.
Māori people have gotten the British crown to recognize the harms of their pillaging...
apologize and pay.
What can we learn about reparations from their story?
At the end of the 18th century about 100,000 Māori lived Aotearoa...
and were part of various tribes still known today as iwi, and subtribes, hapū.
Though they weren't functionally a nation they controlled every corner of the islands.
But in the first half of the 19th century...
Europeans began to arrive by thousands of ships especially people from England.
Far beyond the small settlement of British missionaries already living there.
Disputes start to occur between the new arrivals and Maori particularly around use of land.
The settlers saw the land as property...
something to be owned which was in conflict with the Māori view.
And there were new outside threats too.
Māori learned that the French and other Westerners wanted their lands.
So they began signing this Declaration of Independence in 1835.
Rangatira — or Māori chiefs used the document to make a firm statement to the rest of the world...
that authority with an Aotearoa rested with them.
The document declared "he whenua rangatira" which translates to "an independent state".
With new nationhood, they petitioned King William IV for support and protection.
And a few years later, the British government and Māori chiefs saw the need for another formal document.
There were opportunities to both engage further with the British Crown as treaty partners in having a strategic, political but also trading partner.
In 1840, more than 500 Māori chiefs signed this document:
"Te Tiriti o Waitangi" with the British Crown.
Te Tiriti is the foundational document at the center of the story.
Its creation opened up the gateway to the unlawful British colonization of the islands.
It's been vigorously debated because there are stark differences between the Māori and English texts of the treaty.
The Māori text says that the rangatira have "tino rangatiratanga" which translates to "absolute authority" over their lands, resources, homes, and "toanga" or "treasured posessions".
But the English texts states that the rangatira "cede to Her Majesty the Queen of England..." "all rights and power of sovereignty." Those big differences:
One vision saying you see ceded sovereignty the other one saying actually, you get to govern yourselves and look after yourselves.
You know, it's quite fundamental, really, in terms of how things rolled out across our history.
Within a Māori worldview, within a Māori philosophy...
it's not actually possible to suddenly decide to give up that sovereignty to someone else.
The British proceeded to assert control over the islands after the treaty was signed...
claiming that under British law they had the power to set up a government.
They appointed a governer, William Hobson and formally established Aotearoa as a colony by the end of 1840.
There were land sales or purported land sales where they engaged with perhaps one of the hundred owners...
or, you know 100 people that had rights to a piece of land but engaged with 1 person that effectively would sell the entire block.
Where I'm from in Wairoa was a really big significant purchase of land which was framed as a sale and purchase.
But my ancestors, we're told by the Crown Purchase agent either you sell us this land or we will confiscate it.
And so it those kinds of coercive practices which also resulted in significant land loss.
There was resistance of our people to that happening.
Conflict over land and resource came to a head in 1860.
In the decades long New Zealand wars Māori people battled to protect their land.
But they were severely outnumbered by British troops who killed more than 2000 Māori.
Through the wars, the British confiscated massive amounts of land.
Supported by a new law that said the crown could seize the land of anyone who had rebelled against the Queen.
Māori were allowed to defend their claims to land in court...
but mounting a defense usually included prohibitively expensive legal fees and travel costs.
This land confiscation triggered a breakdown of the Māori economic base and disrupted the communal culture of Māori identity.
Plus, diseases that European colonizers brought to Aotearoa continued to kill Māori in large numbers.
In 1840, shortly after Europeans began arriving by the shipload 80,000 Māori lived on the islands.
By 1896, only 42,000 remained.
Meanwhile, the Pākehā population those who were white or non-Māori ballooned to 701,000 people.
An estimated 88% of Māori lands were taken It wasn't until decades later that Māori activists would force the British Crown to reckon with this history.
Even as a child growing up...
in the first 15 years of our lives, for me, was around how to be a Pākehā.
It was about how to talk like them...
dress like them...
sing like them.
By the 1950s, New Zealand's government had rewritten the history of the Crown's colonization into a rosy story.
One newspaper from the early 1900s quoted a politician who said "The Māoris had always been loyal to the British Empire." "New Zealand was a country that had never been conquered....
or annexed." "It was a mutual agreement." There has been a real perpetuation of the myth that, you know, New Zealand has great race relations.
And often the Treaty of Waitangi is held up as the example of that is to say, look we negotiated this sovereignty by consent.
But in practice the oppression of the Māori had continued for more than 100 years after the Treaty of Waitangi had been signed.
"For the first time in history, a reigning British monarch visits her Māori subjects." Māori military men who fought for the crown in both World Wars were not given the same benefits as Pākehā after their return.
Disparities became glaringly apparent by the mid century.
Compared to Pākehā, Māori had poor health outcomes like double the child mortality rate.
They were over 5 times more likely to be incarcerated and both Māori men and women had lower incomes than their Pākehā counterparts.
And in 1953, the Crown introduced laws that further for some Māori to sell their land.
Those laws, along with World War II Those laws, along with World War II helped incite a mass migration of Māori from rural lands to cities.
Living in Christchurch was a whole experience.
Living in a white town.
You kind of hold your breath and go holy hell, I never experienced racism like that.
As a young boy, I wasn't too sure what the hell was going on but I knew there was something wrong.
I can't help but think about the similarities here between how Black Americans and Native Americans were treated in the United States around the same time.
Many Black Americans and Native Americans enlisted and fought in World War II...
but upon their return from the war they were shut out of benefits that were extended to white American.
Like home loans and educational funding provided by the GI Bill.
Black Americans were segregated through redlining and the benefit didn't extend to Native Americans living on tribal lands.
Over time, the compounding impacts of racial discrimination in the US showed up the same ways they did for Māori populations.
With a higher infant mortality rates...
Black incarceration rate that was just over 5 times higher and much lower networth.
But by the 1960s, with many Maori now gathered in cities they were better positioned to challenge leadership.
"In America, black people are treated very much as colonized people because we're used, we're brutalized the police in our community occupy our area our community, as a foreign group occupies territory.
The advent of television helped Māori tune into the Black Power Movement and the activism of Native Americans in the United States.
But the people have to stand up and demand and they have to understand that they have a right.
In America you have quite a few movers and shakers...
that make a difference, and that was all through marching.
Members of the activist group Ngā Tamatoa channeled these lessons into their protests.
They were part of a movement to revitalize the Māori language te reo Māori which had been activelly surpressed in schools for decades.
And later Ngā Tamatoa helped launch one of the biggest protests Aotearoa history:
the Land March of 1975.
"It's been joined since early this morning by young and old." "And in spite of rain, which set in late in the morning...
the marcheer's spirits are still high." It's a huge project.
A lot of our people actually didn't support us.
They think we're a little bit naive or a little bit nutty.
The protest action needed someone who could rally Māori together.
Her name was Whina Cooper.
Whina Cooper was a respected Māori elder descended from the Te Rahrawa iwi who dedicated her life to Māori land rights and to the rights of Māori women.
She was nearly 80 years old at the time of the march.
We need somebody like that that can bridge through the heart and the minds.
So we got the face.
We need a slogan.
And so we came up with the slogan:
"Not one more acre of Māori land be sold." Not one more acre.
After all these 135 years we have only 2 million acres left.
The march took 29 days and grew to include 5000 people.
They came from all over the north and south islands.
And when they arrived at Parliament marchers presented a petition signed by 60,000 people that laid out their goals.
They were here to establish new laws from Māori land based on their own cultural values:
communal ownership of land within the tribe.
Protest movements anywhere in the world makes a difference.
If you don't protest, nothing will happen.
And people will think everything's all right.
It's not.
The Crown, long recluctant to acknowledge the harms of its colonization was forced to respond.
They established the Treaty of Waitangi Act of 1975 to investigate contemporary breaches of the 1840 treaty.
But it wasn't until after another decade of protests that the Māori won the right to give the investigating tribunal retrospective powers...
the ability to investigate grievances going all the way back to 1840.
While this tribunal could only offer recommendations for government action it opened the door for a kind of reparations.
The government decided to create a pathway to dozens of land and cash settlements that are ongoing today.
I really excited about that to be able to do some more research for us there to share our story.
For us to be able to have this type of conversation.
At last we can talk to each other about it.
At last we can have a voice we can sing about.
I don't have a problem with that.
It's the end product where there seems to be something not quite right.
The settlement was the right thing to do.
The value of the settlement, I think, was wrong.
When you think about it now it's only a drop in the bucket.
There are about 138 government-recognized iwi today.
And they all have their own specific historical grievances with the Crown.
As of 2022, there have been nearly 80 settlements passed into law.
These claims generally work like this.
Iwi must register a historical claim with the Waitangi Tribunal to have their grievances heard and to proceed in the settlement process.
If their claims are deemed well-founded they can begin the process of direct negotiation with the Crown.
After what can be years of back and forth eventually, they write the final deed of settlement that both parties sign.
To receive the settlement assets iwi must set up a governance entity that administers the wins on behalf of the community often putting the money towards business development health and education for the entire group...
not checks to individuals.
The list of what Māori are seeking is long.
It includes millions of dollars, apologies, the return of land waters, fisheries, minerals and the restoration of te reo Māori the Māori language.
And no two settlements or the experience of negotiating them are the same.
But many people live here, Waikato-Tainui the first iwi to settle in 1995 as a model for what settlements could be.
As the first iwi to settle they laid the groundwork for all the settlements that followed in 1995.
In 1995, the Crown recognized the unlawful theft of more than a million acres of Waikato lands in the 1860s and settled with the iwi for $170 million.
This was a time in this country where settlements were new.
It was against public opinion.
It certainly was a courageous move on the part of the government at that time.
Queen Elizabeth signed this treaty settlement which to this day is one of the largest sums of money given to an Iwi.
"This is the first time the Queen has ever signed any law in public." That was the pinnacle of all apologies.
Most apologies are given by the Crown, by the government.
In this instance, it was the only apology made by Queen Elizabeth II.
That we were the only tribe to get that formal apology in a signed letter from her is huge.
Because it was an admission of their guilt of their wrongdoing and their injustice.
The settlement was successful but also controversial.
For one, the iwi was criticized for signing with the Crown just months after dozens of iwi nationwide rejected the government's $1 billion fiscal cap on the settlements.
And the settlement only provided the return of around 30,000 acres.
It's an insignificant amount of land.
When you compare with that which we lost.
One big win was the Te Rapa base which they developed into a shopping district a move to bring them economic independence.
The settlement also included the $15 million Waikato-Tainui College which has helped them invest in education.
Anyone who wants to do business in our tribal area and they'll come talk to us.
We're undeniable now.
Things have changed.
In 2010, Waikato Tainui finalized another settlement.
This time it was for the longest river in New Zealand from which the iwi takes its name, the Waikato River.
We got an agreement that gave us equal say.
And anything that happened on the river, in the river, around the river.
So for me, as a negotiator, for my iwi people, my tribe...
was the greatest honor of all.
The job that we did was was minor compared to the hundreds of our ancestors who died in the battles.
For our land, for who we are.
For our way of life.
They paid a huge sacrifice for us to sit in those offices and try to get a deal with the government in order to resolve our outstanding claims against the Crown.
For other iwi the settlements haven't been as large and they've taken decades to negotiate.
I'm here at Ngati Maru's official settlement ceremony.
Where a representative from the Crown is going to deliver an official apology.
The Crown makes the following apology to Ngati Maru.
The Crown's many breaches of Te Tiriti o Waitangi...
left Ngati Maru...
feeling like refugees in their own homeland.
Its confiscation of half of the Ngati Maru...
was indiscriminate and unwarranted.
The Crown acknowledges that.
Its imprisoned members of Ngati Maru...
assaulted the human rights of the people residing there and forcibly removed many inhabitants, destroyed, and desecrated their homes and sacred buildings stolen heirlooms.
The Crown expresses profound remorse and apologizes.
Ngati Maru's settlement included $30 million in cash the return of 17 land titles and the right to purchase 36 Crown properties including the Te Wera Forest.
I am humbled to have delivered these words to you today.
I know how many of you will be thinking of those loved ones who were lost before they had a chance to hear the Crown apologize for its wrongdoing.
I pay tribute to you.
We all know once you lose your land, you lose your culture, you lose your reo or you lose your identity, you lose everything.
So we have been in a process of reclamation...
and rejuvenation and revitalization.
Ultimately, many Māori see the settlements as an avenue for empowerment and restitution but they ignore know the issues.
Some iwi have expressed that they don't necessarily believe the Crown apology to be genuine and it's something that the Crown does for their own benefit to release themselves of...
I don't know, perhaps burden or guilt over those historical breaches.
Ultimately, the ministers of the Crown get final decisions on the level of quantum, the level of financial redress...
you know what land parcels might be available to come back.
What what we're giving away in the likes of land, water, the air we breathe...
is billions.
All stolen property should be returned.
It's like a car. It's a stolen car.
Your car was taken with everything in the car.
Everything taken.
Then they give you your car back with no motor in it.
Just the wheel.
You can't move it.
You can't drive it.
Yeah.
We want the whole car.
Today, Aotearoa is 27 years into their settlement process.
For some, these settlements have meant life changing differences in business opportunities and education.
In many categories, like median household income Māori outcomes have improved but they still fall behind Pākehā.
I see settlements as a...
reparation.
I think reparations are far too nice a word.
You can't embrace the cruelty...
the injustice...
the loss of life.
This is about righting a wrong.
We're talking about blood here.
These kinds of complications are echoed in the reparations debate in the United States.
Some people say that there's no amount of money that could ever compensate for slavery or for land loss.
And people say that reparations would further divide the United States.
But what the Māori process shows us is that you have to start with acknowledging the past.
"An apology for slavery and the Jim Crowe laws...
which for a century after emancipation..." The Senate apologized for slavery and Jim Crow in 2009.
"Today, the Senate will unanimously makes that apology." But made no mention of reparations.
And while the US apologized to Native Americans for acts of violence and neglect...
the statement was largely buried in the back of a 2010 defense bill.
Even though Aotearoa can't be an exact model for the United States...
Māori have a direct message for people in the US.
The fight for reparations is worth it.
I know it sounds like it's never going to happen.
But truly, there comes a point where they have to start to listen.
The struggle might be long and full of uncertainty.
But if the US continues to push the reparations debate forward people here could gain land, money...
better policies and new pathways to healing.
Just like the Māori.