I thought I was going to be a psychology major in college and then I realized I was making all of my papers about the banjo anyway.
My name is Jake Blount.
I am a performer and scholar of traditional Black folk music.
I live in Providence, Rhode Island.
I live in Providence, Rhode Island.
What's the name of it?
Altamont.
Altamont. Got it.
I first heard that song on the field recording from Murph Gribble, John Lusk and Albert York which is on a release from the Library of Congress called Black Stringband Music from the Library of Congress.
Say what you will about the title.
It's easy to find, you know.
There's Albert Yorke playing guitar John Lusk playing the fiddle and Murph Gribble playing the banjo.
They were a black stringband they recorded in the 1940s and by most definitions they're actually an early bluegrass band.
But for a variety of reasons, I would consider their race to be probably the main reason they aren't really embraced as part of the bluegrass story.
When I study modern day Black banjo players...
I am studying not only the music that they make but what makes that music significant to them within its social context.
The banjo was descended from West African instruments and during enslavement and during the time immediately following people associated the banjo with Black people.
Toward the end of enslavement we start to see blackface minstrels come to the fore.
Blackface minstrelsy was this really...
gross performance practice in which white musicians would black up their face and lampoon Black musical traditions for a white audience.
That had the effect of popularizing the banjo which was featured very prominently.
And eventually bluegrass emerged.
And that became the main way that people knew the banjo and interacted with it.
Early on in the record industry when folks started going down to the south they began to record artists and consider how they could sell those records.
They decided to confine Black musicians to a category called "race records" and confine white musicians to a category called "hillbilly records".
The end result of that was that Black people who played what might have been considered hillbilly music which would have been early country string band music...
they were not recorded because they weren't marketable in that category.
Race records were by Black people and for Black audiences but were supposed to be blues or jazz.
Many of the early country musicians had Black mentors and Black collaborators.
Lesley Riddle, for example, who taught the Carter family.
Many of the Black musicians who were teaching early white country musicians did not get recorded themselves.
And that's just one iteration of this pattern we see where the music industry extracts artwork from Black communities uses them to generate a ton of money and then directs absolutely none of that money back into the community that invented the music it's selling.
People spend a lot of time deriding and belittling Black folk music traditions instead of studying them.
And that's one of the big flaws with our current canon of folkloric recordings.
But the vast majority of these recordings were made by white people.
We know that many of the Black string bands at that time, including Gribble, Lusk, and York, had separate repertoire that they played for Black people then they played for white people.
Which means that probably much of this music never got put down on any sort of semi-permanent medium because it wasn't safe to perform it for them in that time and place.
My new album, The New Faith, is an Afro-futurist story that explores what traditional Black folk music might sound like post-climate crisis.
My idea for this album was to make a field recording from the future.
It lets me go backward and forward in time, at the same time.
Once there were no sun.
Once there were no sun.
And I learned "Once there was no sun" from a recording of Bessie Jones.
Once there was no sun.
Lord, once there was no sun.
She was a fantastic singer and lived for most of her life in Georgia amongst the Gullah Geechee people.
It describes the world before the creation of Sun and Moon.
This particular song comes out of a ring shout tradition.
The ring shout is a religious ritual that's been passed down among the Gullah Geechee people for a very long time and it includes someone with a broomstick banging out this bum bum bum, bum bum bum rhythm.
We wound up just putting that on the kick drum because I tried to come up with a different part and it just turned into that anyway.
Once there was no sun.
once there were no sun.
Turns out the thing that they've been doing for several hundred years is... right.
I knew I wanted to draw off of this Hans Sloane text because it's the oldest stuff that I've studied.
Hans Sloane made a trip through the Caribbean in the late 1600s.
His work is one of the earliest written descriptions of a banjo that we think we have.
And he included sheet music for some of the songs that he heard people singing.
I was really drawn to this very simple but very epic sounding song called Angola which is just nice call and response arrangement between an instrument and a voice.
So the little banjo piece that I incorporated there is...
Because of the way the progression of the song goes I wound up changing it to...
A lot of these songs either have no hook or only a hook.
There's there's never a verse and a chorus.
And that left me with with a little bit of a heavy lift as far as finding things to put in between the verses.
And I wound up coming up with these rhythmic fiddle parts.
The clapping pattern.
Clapping is very prominent in all these old ensemble recordings of Black folk music.
It's just, you know, one of the most accessible percussion instruments you have.
When drums are illegal, as they were for black people for most of this music's developmental period.
I knew that it had to be in there.
There was no obvious place to put it on this because of the way the beat lined up.
And it's a very weird pattern, even though that's not a sound or a texture that you would find in those field recordings.
I tried to use the same approach of the field recordings in building those sounds and...
I think it wound up integrating pretty well.
Once there was no sun.
Once there was no sun.
Once there was no sun.
I heard the angels singing.
I think part of what drove me to this new project is thinking about the continuity of those sounds.
Instead of trying to reenact something.
Maybe envision something instead.
When it comes to the older stuff...
because those folks were exploited by the record industry because they were misrepresented by academics and by PR reps and everybody else along the way who was sold this music but was not part of that community...
I feel duty bound to set the record straight.
I think there's something that is very cool about representing those old traditions and feeling like I'm part of a solid lineage that way.